+++
title = 'Globals are not really evil'
date = 2024-05-20T16:02:44Z
+++

In programming, when globals are mentioned,
usually one would start to think about global variables.

When I observe that someone starts discussing about programming
at an introductory level,
for example in a setting where people meet not long ago,
the following statement may be made:

> Global variables are bad.

I used to believe in this dogma, and attempted to avoid globals like plague.
However progressing through years of professional software engineering
has taught me that it is *not the globals that are evil,
but the incorrect usage of it is.*

Why are globals frowned upon?
It is largely due to global variables, the most popular form of globals,
being used in the old days of programming to store shared state,
making the shared state highly accessible to most other parts of a software,
and more importantly the *subsequent lack of discipline
to define a scope of when to write to such shared state*.

```python
i_am_a_global = 0

def function1():
    global i_am_a_global
    i_am_a_global = 1

def function2():
    global i_am_a_global
    i_am_a_global = 2
```

In most software that is inherently practical e.g. a production software,
globals are usually required, especially to hold context and state
to interface with data that is external to the software itself.
A classic example would be a backend application that connects to a database.

```java
@Service
@RequiredArgsConstructor
public class BookService {
    // client that interfaces with external MongoDB database
    private final MongoTemplate mongoTemplate;

    public Optional<Book> findOne(Query query) {
        return Optional.ofNullable(mongoTemplate.findOne(query, Book.class));
    }
}
```

In the above example, we need `MongoTemplate` utility to connect to the database.
Where can we get the `mongoTemplate` object? We can either:

- Construct `MongoTemplate` and `BookService` in the entry point
of the backend application.
- Construct `MongoTemplate` and a factory of `BookService` in the entry point
of the backend application, then pass the `MongoTemplate` to the factory
to construct the `BookService`.
- Construct factories of `MongoTemplate` and `BookService` in the entry point
of the backend application, then use another integration object to coordinate
the factories to eventually construct `MongoTemplate` and `BookService` objects.
- (more alternatives as we introduce more layers of indirection...)

Notice that at some point, some object must hold a global context of
how components of the application are constructed,
and how these components e.g. a database client can be subsequently used
by various business logic to perform relevant operations
e.g. querying a database.

One popular approach to reduce object construction boilerplate and
coordination (constructing descendants of objects) in backend applications
is to use a dependency injection (DI) framework, like Spring Beans in Java.

```java
@Component // a Spring bean
public class Car {
    private final Engine engine;

    public Car(
            Engine engine // another Spring bean
    ) {
        this.engine = engine; // look, no global Engine!
    }
}
```

From a surface level, DI frameworks seem appealing to the dislike of globals,
because object dependencies are derived from constructors and sometimes setters.
However, these dependee objects must originate from somewhere,
and in DI frameworks the default answer is to host them as singleton objects.
*Guess what is a synonym for singletons?* **Globals**.

Globals are just another concept that engineers need to embrace
and use correctly. *Define and respect the scope of such globals*,
both literally i.e. in software development practices,
and figuratively i.e. do not dismiss it entirely
just because it is the easiest thing to scrutinise.
